# Kalonzo’s State House bid excites Mwingi

**Author:** Unknown Author  
**Date:** 2007-04-21T21:00:00Z  
**Source URL:** https://nation.africa/kenya/news/kalonzo-s-state-house-bid-excites-mwingi-532740  

---

Mwingi district was once considered a backwater in Ukambani politics. Not any more. With the excitement generated by the presidential candidacy of Mwingi North MP Stephen Kalonzo Musyoka, the district is firmly in the spotlight of the region’s politics.

Mr Kalonzo Musyoka

Mwingi eclipsed neighbouring Kitui, the base of Health minister Charity Ngilu, Mr Musyoka’s main rival for Ukambani leadership, as well as Machakos and Makueni districts as the place to watch for political direction in the region.

In the twin constituencies of Mwingi North and Mwingi South, political talk of the moment is not about parliamentary elections but Mr Musyoka’s presidential bid. To many people here it is a done deal, and it is just a matter of time before ODM-K gives their son the ticket that will send President Kibaki packing from State House.

**Beyond Mwingi**

Those are sentiments that extend beyond Mwingi to the rest of the vast region, of course. And it helps that his loyal colleague, Mwingi South MP and deputy Speaker David Musila is the chairman of key ODM affiliate the Liberal Democratic Party and also sits on key committees of the Opposition umbrella grouping.

One thing that Mr Musyoka’s presidential bid and high opinion poll ratings have managed to do is to catapult him to the apex of Ukambani leadership. He has eclipsed Mrs Ngilu who has been deserted by all the MPs from the region, including those nominated to Parliament as her key allies.

The mention recently of Mr Musyoka’s name during the burial of African brotherhood Church Bishop Nathan Ngala in Kathiani constituency was greeted with ululation that must have made President Kibaki, who was present, sit up and take note.

Yet even with all the excitement Mr Musyoka has generated in the area, there are still many questions. One big one is what will happen if he fails to get the ODM nomination.

And that is important if his supremacy in the region is based largely on the assumption that he will run for President on the ticket of the outfit best placed to give President Kibaki a run for his money.

If Mr Musyoka is not the ODM candidate, then a lot of things could change, affecting the support he has built on home ground.

Doubts are already being raised about Mr Musyoka’s prospects by the recent Steadman opinion poll results in which for the first time, he fell behind his chief rival, Mr Raila Odinga, in the ODM ratings and President Kibaki built up what looks like an unassailable lead.   
    
**Past polls**

Mr Musyoka did not hide his excitement over past polls which showed him sometimes beating President Kibaki and comfortably ahead of his ODM rivals, Mr Odinga, Mr Uhuru Kenyatta, Mr Musalia Mudavadi, Mr William Ruto and Mr Najib Balala.

Now he was reduced to dismissing the latest Steadman quarterly poll as a sham! But, still he is the man of the moment in Ukambani.

Top Ukambani musicians like Ken Musyoka wa Maria and Bosco Mulwa have composed hit songs lauding the region’s favourite political son. The region has had many political giants in the past, like the late Paul Ngei and the late Mulu Mutisya. But none has captured the excitement of a possible tenure at State House the way Mr Musyoka has.

However, uncertainty over whether Mr Musyoka is indeed destined for great things is still very telling. A recent visit to Mwingi North and Mwingi South revealed a face of enthusiastic voters who are not sure of which way to vote if things took an unexpected turn.

A host of civic and parliamentary aspirants were yet undecided about which party ticket they will stand on. They are hedging their bets.

Of late Mr Musyoka has been the most sought-out politician by aspirants who see his endorsement as a sure ticket to secure civic and parliamentary positions.

When word recently went round that he was going to visit ailing former military chief Gen (Rtd) Jackson Mulinge in his Kathiani home, a host of past and current MPs, and fresh political hopefuls, rushed to be seen by Mr Musyoka’s side.

Some of them until recently were the Mwingi North MP’s sworn enemies.

But there is still fear of a major fallout if Musyoka fails to win the ODM ticket.

MPs close to him confided that their man is likely to employ a plan ‘B’ if his hopes are “unfairly” dashed. Thus the assumption that if he loses, Mr Musyoka will cry foul and renew his candidacy on an alternative ticket.

“He is going for nothing short of the presidency,” said an MP seen to be close to Mr Musyoka.

“From Mwingi to Machakos to Kitui and Makueni districts and the recently formed little districts of Kibwezi, Yatta, Kangundo and Kitui South the voting pattern will change if Kalonzo is denied the ticket,” predicts Nairobi lawyer Eric Mutua, a candidate in Mwingi South.

He says that Mr Musyoka’s influence in Mwingi and the rest of Ukambani will wane if he is not the ODM candidate. “One will not have to go for his blessings before seeking elective political positions in the region,” says Mr Mutua.

To some, Mwingi is supposed to be Mr Musyoka’s launching pad to the highest office, but even at home his performance has been wanting.

**Referendum campaign**

Some point to the referendum campaign in 2005 when the pro-government Banana camp managed 6,000 ‘Yes’ votes in Mwingi North and 3,000 in Mwingi South in favour of the proposed new Constitution. In Mr Odinga’s Nyanza, say Mr Musyoka’s local critics, the decisive ‘No’ votes showed who controlled the masses.

Mr Michael George Kwali, a director of the Tana Water Services Board, says Mr Musyoka is not up to the mark when it comes to mobilising the masses.

Critics say it would be interesting to see how politicians who suffered after crossing Mr Musyoka’s path in his heyday as a top Kanu official would help him to secure crucial backing for his bid now that they have joined his camp.

“I doubt whether their hearts are with Mr Musyoka. His recent fallout with influential people who have in the past helped him in his political ambitions like millionaire gemstone dealer Johnston Muthama was unfortunate as it was regrettable,” says lawyer Mutua.

But others who crossed swords with Mr Musyoka in the past such as Mr Musila are now firmly in his camp. So are many MPs who used to be with Mrs Ngilu.

Asked to confirm or deny news that he had fallen out with Mr Musyoka, Mr Muthama chose to reserve his comments.

“Right now I am in a hurry to catch a flight to Hong Kong, I will talk about it later,” he said. But a close associate of the tycoon, Mr John Katama, did not mince is words: “You cannot trust Kalonzo, he has let down the boss”.

Of course Mr Musyoka’s allies might scoff at the description of Mr Muthama as the “the boss”. The gemstone dealer is himself terribly inconsistent on the choice of candidates to back, crossing back and forth between who seem to be the men of the moment. His own forays into politics have hardly been successful.

**Political organisation**

There is also criticism of Mr Musyoka’s political organisation. In Mwingi, says Mr Mutua, “the people running the show in what is supposed to be the launching ground are questionable characters who cannot even win civic seats. He has to change this, he has left out people who matter,” says the aspirant.

Soon after the referendum Mr Musyoka appointed a group of wealthy individuals from the region led by architect Reuben Mutiso of Tectura International to help coordinate his national effort. Mr Muthama was part of this team before the fallout.

Mr Muthama had played a role when the late Ukambani kingmaker, Mr Mulu Mutisya, helped ease Mr Musyoka political rise.

When a camp belonging to late minister Johnstone Makau, Gen (rtd) Jackson Mulinge and Mrs Nyiva Mwendwa made life difficult for Mr Musyoka in the early 1990s, Mr Mutisya countered the move by bringing younger politicians like the late Tony Ndilinge (Kilome), Mr Peter Maundu (Makueni) and Col (Rtd) Ronald Kiluta to keep the Mulinge-Makau-Nyiva axis at bay.

Mr Musyoka’s think-tank, which meets weekly in Nairobi, has some serving and past permanent secretaries as members as well as academics and professionals from other fields.

A recent recruit to the group said although things might appear cosy for the Mwingi North MP’s ambitions they still have mountains to climb to get him the strength that he needs for the big battle.

“We know that we have a myriad of obstacles, he is our son and we cannot abandon him at his hour of need but the task is tough,” said a member of the think-tank.

Many of them are also hedging their bets, and admit that they are likely to seek other avenues if the bid for the ODM-K ticket flops.

About two years ago close associates of the former Foreign Affairs minister formed the Rainbow Orange Alliance Party (ROAP), which could have been the Plan B.
